«««
title: going down the stack
date: 2025-04-12
tags: software
draft: true
»»»

I have been an working as an engineer for 3 years now. In some sense, a major chunk of my job has always been to make sure that data flows from one place to another, correctly and quickly. Now, you can choose to put me in the bucket of "backend engineering" or "data engineering". To me, they all seem to come under just one umbrella - which is to help the business some key objective. Most of these problems in my career have been problems at the application layer. APIs, screens, database indexes, firewall configurations. In almost all of these systems, I have operated as the consumer of the systems layer. On some days, I have had to take a deep dive and see what is going on. But on most days, the ignorance is acceptable. And to some extent, at a deeply personal level, I am bored of the application layer. 

For many months now, I have lurked around the keys ideas in databases. There is also a weird and interesting around many engineers in India getting into database development at roughly the same time. There's also the case of agentic coding which truly has automated many parts of the plumbing software thing that we just have more time in our hands now. There was a time in my 3-year career where I spent a lot of time doing some level of systems programming in Rust. Advait and I built a video streaming pipeline to send video and audio frames from a powerful remote desktop to your local computer as fast as possible. As per our unpublished and somewhat primitive benchmarks, we were about 16-32 milliseconds behind Parsec - which is the best video streaming pipeline in the world. While the startup didn't work for various economical reasons, I had deep fulfillment in building this layer. This was something that AI could not have built, atleast at that point in time. Before this, I had been reading a lot of DDIA, like so many engineers. Here, I first learnt about the ideas of LSMs, BTrees, etc. and it blew my mind. I always had a thing for data structures, especially hash maps in college and now I could finally see tree-like structures being used in global production systems. But anyway, coming back to the present, sadly, in India there are more jobs at the application layer than there are at the systems layer so I am in some sense more incentivised to work on the former. However, over many many months, I have realised that the idea of getting into systems programming deserves a fair and focussed shot from me. In a way that is uninterrupted by what is the hot thing going on in the world right now. I have always loved PostgreSQL. I love C for its straightforwardness. Why not just devote a good chunk of 2026 to just learning about PostgreSQL and hopefully, hacking on it? This is the idea that I am picking up. Hopefully, I will also be writing about all the interesting things I would learn along the way. So far, I have always tried to sort of timebox my activities with a high bias for shipping things. When you work in startups for many years, this is what tends to happen. However, I want to take all the pressure off my shoulders for a bit and just wander with focus in the realm of my favourite database. In some sense, I am taking off from the application layer and trying to go down the stack.

I also tried to learn more and more math over the past 1-1.5 years. I launched a website. I started a math club. I learnt a lot of number theory. I started learning abstract algebra, got inspired but eventually gaveup on it. Now, what if we were to pick that up again but this time, with no pressure of learning everything in 2-3 months and actually giving myself 1 year to just fuck around with 1 textbook? That's it.

I have had a similar love affair with history. And I have tried to jump on various topics, often skimming. What we if took off the pressure again in 2026 and just decided to read a 450 page book on world war 1.

Generally speaking, if I started cutting distractions from my life and turned into a slow but deeply focussed and intentional kind of a setup, what would that look like? 

All downsides of becoming irrelevant in modern day software are fixable by just putting in 2 months and shipping a bunch of side projects to get the entire idea of the application layer. Now, as a personal bet to ourselves, where can the systems layer take us? Let's explore.